At the end of last year's Google Summer of Code Program, Parrot ended up with
several branches of student work in various conditions which had not merged
into trunk. At the time of writing this, there are still 4 branches left over
from that program which have not yet been merged.

Over the past couple of months we've been slowly trying to change the way
Parrot does business. One of the most important and most visible changes is
the new way we are handling roadmap items. No longer does our roadmap
represent an almost fanciful list of things we would like to see happen. Our
roadmap now is a list of things which we are firmly dedicated to deliver
on or before the target deadline. Under promise, over deliver. And most
importantly, if we say we are going to have something done by a particular
time we *mean it*.

GSOC last year and the years before that as well were suffering from similar
problems to what our roadmap goals were seeing: Too much ambition, and too
little plan for actually delivering. In the end there are some projects which
were never completed (gsoc_threads), some that were completed but we didn't
want to merge (gsoc_nfg), and some that were completed but we didn't know
where to put them (gsoc_instrument and gsoc_past_optimization).

This year, we're doing something a little bit different. This year, we want to
try to pick more modest projects, and create a firm plan for when and how to
integrate them into Parrot. Every project, in order to be considered for
acceptance, must be able to be completed and integrated by the end of the
program (or shortly thereafter) with a very high degree of confidence. If you
can't tell me with something like 90% confidence that your project will not
only succeed, but succeed in the time alotted, you don't get the green light
for it.

