---
layout: post
title: Blog Migration
categories: Personal
---

I decided a few months ago that it was time for me to move off of Blogger and
find a platform that offered more customizability and control. There's nothing
wrong with Blogger *per se*, but I was starting to get tired of it's editor
specifically and the fact that I didn't really have any control of the content
once I posted it there.

I found [Jekyll](http://github.com/mojombo/jekyll) through my contributions to
Github, and decided it was the platform for me. I'm not a huge fan of either
[Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) or
[Textile](http://textile.thresholdstate.com/), the two markup languages used
by Jekyll, but there are far worse tools to have to use when writing a blog
post. Being able to write my own markup in my own text editor is a huge
improvement over what I was doing.

I'm in the middle of preparing for that migration now. I will be moving off
Blogger within the next few days or weeks and will be hosting my blog at
Github, at least temporarily. I don't know where or if I will move it to some
place more permanent after that, but Github is a decent home for it now.

Before making the final migration, I have a few requirements that I need to
complete first.

 * I need to get a domain name. It's good to be in control of your own
identity like that anyway, and it also comes in handy if I ever need to change
hosts again. Obvious choices like "whiteknight.com" are taken or parked. I'm
absolutely not interested in anything that's going to cost me more than 20$.
 * I need to migrate all my blog content, including all comments. I would also
like to migrate all post metadata (especially category tags), and update all
inter-post links to point to the new locations. This is no small feat, but I
am working on a program to do exactly this and will talk about it in a
subsequent post
 * I need to set up a new commenting system. I don't get too many comments on
this blog, but the ones I do receive are extremely valuable to me. Since
Jekyll is a static site generator, I need to find a separate solution for
hosting and managing comments. I have been looking closely at
[DISQUS](http://disqus.com/), but would be happy to hear about other
alternatives too.
 * I need to set up an RSS or ATOM feed. Initially I will probably set up a
simple ATOM feed using Jekyll, since I don't plan on doing too many fancy
things like monitoring subscriptions or serving advertisements.

This post is being hosted on [my new blog](http://whiteknight.github.com),
and will be linked to from my old Blogger site. I won't be publishing any more
posts to Blogger, only links to posts on the new site. When I get my
conversion tool complete, I will migrate all content. When I get the atom feed
set up, I will probably close my Blogger site down entirely (or lock it and
redirect all traffic to the new site). I will post updates about my progress
as I go.
