---
layout: post
categories: [Parrot, Foundation]
title: The Parrot Foundation
---

This post is quite late. Late by years. The problem is that there hasn't been 
anything to talk about until now and having to keep repeating "nothing is 
happening and I don't know why" over and over again was too much of a pain.

I don't know the exact status right this instant, but as far as I know the 
Parrot Foundation has been dissolved (or is in the process of being so, 
imminently). All money and IP has been transferred to the Perl Foundation for 
safe keeping.

##So What Happened?

Honestly, I couldn't tell you. We were elected to the board in...was it 2009? 
I can't even remember how long ago it was. I remember being super-excited and 
having all sorts of plans for things to do.We wanted to raise money and fund 
grants like The Perl Foundation does. We wanted to go out advertising, and 
interacting with communities for dynamic languages, and doing conferences and
outreach to universities and... the list went on and on. All of the newly 
elected members of the board were eager to start doing things and pushing 
Parrot up to the next level.

When we were elected the future was bright. Parrot was on an upward trajectory 
and the world was our oyster.

We ran into a severe problem almost immediately upon taking office. The 
foundation hadn't received it's 503(c) status from the IRS yet. The reason why 
this is such a problem is that there is a bit of a deadline. Beyond a certain 
amount of time organizations become ineligible for 503(c) status. Or, applying 
for the status becomes much more complicated or something. I don't remember all 
the details right now, so if somebody reading this knows please feel free to 
remind me about it. In either case, there was a deadline, that deadline came 
very shortly after our elections, and we were completely unaware and unprepared 
for it when we were elected.

So that was the first big shock. We didn't realize at the time of the election 
that Parrot hadn't already applied for and received 503(c) status. The first
thing I did when I learned this was to print out the application and start
filling in the blanks. The problem is that there were too many blanks and, as I
alluded to above, I didn't have access to all the paperwork and details that
would have been needed to get to the end of it. I don't remember exactly when
the deadline was in relation to the election but I know we had a few weeks to
get the paperwork in. It seems like it should have been possible to do.

The first thing I want to make very clear, before going on any further, is that
the previous incarnation of the board didn't really do anything wrong and didn't
really drop the ball per se. They did a large amount of work setting up the
legal footings of the foundation. If I have any complaint at all it's that they
didn't communicate to either the Parrot members or the incoming candidates the
details of the tax status, or didn't do so adequately. But then again, like I
said above, we had a few weeks to get the necessary paperwork in which should
have been possible to do, if uncomfortably close, if we had made a concerted 
effort as a team to do it.

I should also point out a few facts here, as an aside. 503(c) status is so 
important because it would have labeled the foundation a tax exempt charity 
organization. This means that not only would the foundation not need to pay
taxes on its earnings, but that potential donors could write off their
contributions to us on their own taxes. Without 503(c) donations could 
potentially be taxed both ways: The donors would get taxed for income which
wasn't going to a registered charity and the foundation would get taxed on the
income. This isn't a great situation to be in, and effectively renders the
foundation unable to raise or spend any money. Also, if anybody can remember the
CSPAN news headlines from so far back, it turns out that the IRS was actually
putting a lot of scrutiny towards open-source software organizations that
were applying to become tax-exempt, so maybe our application might have been
denied in any case.

To get to the meat of the issue, I mentioned that we didn't have access to the
necessary paperwork. This is partly true. Somebody did have access to these
things but failed to provide them. Now, I'm not in the business of naming names
and I don't feel like there would be any benefit in some kind of public shaming.
We had a person on the board who was in a position of central importance to the
proper functioning of that body, who was unable to execute the duties of office
for reasons I do not quite understand. Maybe the reasons don't matter anyway.
The problem was that we, like any piece of software, had a really bad bottleneck
that we were unable to route around.

When I was elected I was given the job of Treasurer. It wasn't my first choice
of position, but I was determined to do everything in my power as treasurer to
help push the foundation forward. The treasurer needs some simple things in
order to perform basic duties of the role. Things like access to the bank 
account, previous tax filings, financial statements and other things like that.
I didn't have them and, because of the aforementioned bottleneck, I was unable 
to get them.

All the documents I needed, I was told, were ready and just needed to be mailed. 
They were in a box, sitting by the front door, all that was needed was time to 
get it to the post office. Just a couple minutes maybe, some saturday morning. 
Just be patient and it would arrive just as soon as possible. So I waited.

And waited. I asked again and waited some more. And again. And more. I offered
to pay postage out of my own pocket. Nothing. I asked other people to make a 
house call, to go visit directly and pick the materials up for me. Nothing.
Living on the otherside of the country meant my options were limited, but I feel
like I exercised every option that was at my disposal. It was all for nothing.
It's 2015 now, half a decade after this mess began, and I *still* don't have 
any of this information. But then again, I stopped asking for it years ago. 

We can talk about excuses all day long and I haven't been walking in the other
person's shoes so I really can't say if it was indeed impossible to do or not.
At this point it doesn't matter, because it's all over now and there is no way
to save the ship from sinking. Maybe the blame falls on me. Maybe I didn't ask
correctly. Maybe there were another option that I missed. Maybe I didn't 
communicate the urgency of my need and the gravity of the situation. Maybe I was
asking the wrong person all that time and could have easily gotten what I needed
by asking somebody else instead. I don't know and there is no way for me to 
ever know.

Without the information necessary to act as treasurer, I couldn't do my job. 
When things like invoices came in that needed to be paid (mostly a holding fee
from our legal representative) I couldn't handle it myself. So I dutifully 
forwarded those emails to the parrot-directors mailinglist and hoped,
impotently, that somebody who *could* handle it did so. I didn't mention above 
but I have also been the list admin for the parrot-directors list, so I had that
going for me, which is nice.

Without bank account information, when the GSOC or Google Code-In come around
and Google wants to send PaFo a check for participation, I can't even fill out 
the paperwork. I can't give them a bank account number to drop the money in to. 
When people want to go to Google for the post-GSOC meetups and they promise to 
reimburse our travel expenses, I can't write a check to do it. Again, I was
supposedly the treasurer, but other people had these abilities and I never did.

##Elections

So a year passes and nobody so much as mentions board elections. I guess I could 
have organized them myself, or encouraged others to pick it up again, but I 
didn't. In that first year we didn't accomplish a single thing. Not one. We 
didn't have a meeting. We didn't vote on anything. We didn't make any decisions. 
We didn't reach a single goal. The IRS deadline came and went before we 
could do anything about it and everything else fell apart after that. The only 
thing I can say with certainty that I tried to do things and I failed, and I'm 
sorry for that. I cannot speak about the motivations of the other board members, 
though I suspect several others were in the same boat as I.

Why didn't we have elections? The people who had organized and planned them in 
years past didn't offer, and nobody on the board (myself included) made moves to 
do it, and so it didn't happen. By that time the board members seemed to have 
all fallen into a state of paralysis and without somebody, anybody, nudging the 
process along it just didn't happen. I regret it to a point, but then again it's 
hard to say that elections would have done anything to help. A new group of
board members who were rendered just as impotent as we were, but were more
confused about *why* things were the way they were might not have been much of
a help.

At some point I think we all realized that it was a lost cause. Nothing was 
happening. *Nothing could happen*. The foundation was dead in the water. 
Everybody was losing interest and there was no hope that anything would 
magically get better. Jim resigned at some point, quietly. I don't know if he 
did it from frustration, or what his motivation was, but out he went. I wanted 
to resign too, but I figured that somebody needed to be sitting at the wheel 
when the final dissolution vote was held. So that's why I stayed, to cast that 
one last vote when the opportunity finally came around. As far as I'm aware
the decision was made without me. Nobody had heard from me in a while and I 
suspect I wasn't needed for a quorum, so it's done. Or, at least I heard it was.

See, if we had elections, I was so demoralized that I definitely wouldn't have 
stood for re-election, and I suspect the other remaining "active" board members 
wouldn't have either. What would have been the point? I hated what was happening 
or, more specifically, what wasn't happening and if I had a graceful way out I 
might have taken it and dumped all our problems onto the next generation. And 
then the next group would have inherited all the same problems and been just as 
paralysed as we were, and then somebody else would have been sitting dutifully 
in the wheelhouse waiting for the ship to finally sink below the waves.

Maybe this is just pessimistic thinking on my part. I felt like I couldn't do
anything to help, so I just assumed nobody else could have either. Maybe
elections would have brought in fresh people who would have been able to solve 
our problems and I'm to blame (in whole or in part) for not making sure
elections happened. If so, I'm sorry about that too.

##Dissolution

I hit a point where I was burned out with the coding part of Parrot, and haven't 
contributed to the software side since. I've been working on a blog post about 
that for years now; writing and rewriting, drafting and revising, expanding and 
elaborating. Maybe someday I will actually publish it. Long after I stopped 
contributing to the Parrot repository, or participating in Parrot discussions or
Parrot design, I was still moderating that mailing list and waiting, patiently, 
for something to happen in the Foundation. 

Sometime in 2011 or 2012 maybe, Allison helped organize some phone calls with our
lawyer and with some other groups that might have been able to absorb the 
foundation and take over management of it. These talks were productive but
ultimately lead nowhere. I can't remember exactly why but it had something to do
with our bottleneck and something to do with lack of drive from our remaining
board members. Remember that this was a time when the economy wasn't doing 
particularly great and a lot of people were having to be more devoted to work
and things like that, so not everybody had lots of free time to spare. I had to
take some vacation hours in the middle of a few work days to get on conference 
calls and things like that. This economic situation and people having a lot
less free time to devote to parrot is also a big reason why several of our
developers stopped contributing to the repo. It's not the only reason, of
course. There were problems with the software and people were starting to get
disillusioned, but the economic situation definitely helped nudge people who
were already close enough to the edge. But, that's a different subject entirely.

After those other talks and conference calls failed to produce any outcome,
everything basically came to a complete halt. Nothing happened, and that was the
way for years. When 2015 rolled around I sent Allison an exasperated email 
asking if, maybe, this was the year something would happen. She told me that it 
already might have. Somebody was going to send the last signed bit of paper to 
the legal firm and the foundation would be dissolved. This is why I'm writing 
this blog post now. The foundation is finally dead and people deserve an
autopsy.

##The End

I want to personally thank Allison. She wasn't a member of the board in this
final iteration, but she did swoop in like a super hero to try and save things 
when we were floundering. Then, when we all gave up hope and decided to just end
it with grace, she helped facilitate communications between us and the lawyers 
to get that ball rolling. Without her, and this is hard to imagine, even less 
would have gotten done in the past few years.

For my part, I keep wondering if maybe I could have done more. If I could have
routed around our bottle neck and managed to breath some measure of life into
the foundation. Maybe some of my goals were still accessible. Maybe I was just
too young, or too inexperienced to know how to resolve issues like this. Maybe
things could have been different now that I'm older and wiser. There are a lot
of maybes because, in my mind, there are so many things which I do not know and
do not understand. But the one thing I can say for certain is this: I was
elected for a purpose, I didn't fulfill that purpose, and for that I am sorry.

My tenure on the board of the Parrot Foundation has been the most frustrating,
disappointing and regretful periods of my entire life. At the very least, I'm
able to derive some closure and put the whole thing behind me. Could that we
never speak of any of this again.

Maybe, in the interests of complete closure, I'll finally publish that other 
blog post about the technical side of the project, why I left and why I didn't 
come back. That, I think, will help answer the rest of the outstanding 
questions that people have been asking me over the years. With that one 
exception, I consider the matter closed and I'm glad to finally wash my hands of
it.



